(19) Material for MkDocs: Full Tutorial To Build And Deploy Your Docs Portal - YouTube

[00:00] Welcome back to the channel. In today's video, we're diving into material for MK docs, the ultimate framework for creating stunning interactive document sites In this tutorial, we'll be creating a new documentation portal completely from scratch, and then hosting that on the web for free using GitHub pages.
[00:19] Along the way, I'll show you just a handful of the awesome features that material for MK docs comes bundled with, such as setting a dynamic color scheme, adding a splash of personality with emojis, icons, and logos to make your content visually appealing. How to create custom code blocks that are based on the programing language specified.
[00:40] How to better organize your content using tabs. How to emphasize parts of your content using admonitions. Also known as call outs and how to bring your ideas to life with statically rendered diagrams directly in your docs. Now you can follow along with me directly in this video, or if you prefer, I have a written version of this tutorial available on my website.
[01:03] I'll leave a link to the written tutorial in the description of this video. This is going to be a pretty in-depth tutorial, so if this is your first time using material for MK docs, then you're probably best to just follow it all through from the beginning. But if you've used material for MK docs before and just want to know about certain feature, I've left all the time codes below so you can jump around the video at your leisure.
[01:26] So if this sounds like something you'd be interested in and breathe in, breathe out and let's explore this together. Before we dive into the demo, let's quickly go over the differences between MK docs and material for MK docs, as there is often some confusion. Plain MK docs is a static site generator specifically designed for creating documentation websites.
[01:49] So by using MK docs alone, you get a relatively vanilla and straightforward site for your documentation. On the other hand, material for MK docs is a theme built on top of MK docs. It transforms your documentation site with a modern, responsive design inspired by Material Design principles. Now, what's important to note is that this feature doesn't just change the look.
[02:12] It enhances functional with built in plugins that support features like blog posts, social cards, advanced search capabilities, and loads more. So basically, MK docs provides the core functionality of building a static site. While material for MK docs significantly elevates the visual and interactive experience of your documentation.
[02:33] Okay, now that's out of the way. Let's get to work on setting up our new material for MK topsides. Let's quickly go over the prerequisites you'll need to have installed if you want to follow along with this tutorial. Firstly, do be aware that I'll be conducting this tutorial on a mac. If you're following on windows, then some of the commands we type into in the terminal will be ever so slightly different, but I'll try to call those out.
[02:58] So we're going to be using the Python version of material for MK docs in this tutorial, and you'll need to have Python three installed. I'll be using version 3.1.6 in this video. So either that or a later version should work fine. We'll be using the python package manager called pip to install the required dependencies.
[03:17] But if you're running Python 3.4 or later, then pip is included anyway by default. Otherwise, if you're using an earlier version of Python, then you might need to install pip. Now to follow along with the coding. It's helpful if you have an already installed, and I'll be using Visual Studio Code in this video.
[03:35] And finally, we'll be publishing our documentation portal on GitHub pages. So you'll need to have an account on GitHub and ideally have it installed on the command line as well. And that's all you should need. So let's jump over to a terminal and get started. So I've opened a terminal here, and I'm in the folder that I want to install my MK docs material demo.
[03:55] So the first thing I'm going to do is check my Python version. So to do that I'm going to type which Python. And I can see here that my Python has been aliased to Python three. So if I just check my Python three. So if I say which Python three, I can see here that I've installed Python 312. And I've installed that through homebrew.
[04:15] Now, if you're running on windows, I think the command to use is where Python instead of which. So I now want to create my virtual environment. So to do that I can do Python minus m. The envy. The envy. Then to activate that environment would do source. Be envy. Slash bin. Forward slash. Activate. And again the command to do this on windows is slightly different I'll put that on the screen. Now.
[04:38] So now that we've activated our virtual environment, let's check our version. So I do pip and then it's double dash version. You can see here I've got pip version 20 4.2 installed. So now we can install mQTT docs materials. To do that I'll do pip install mqtt docs hyphen material. So Pip is going to go ahead and install my docs material for us.
[05:01] Let's not open Visual Studio Code in this folder. So I do code dot. And within Visual Studio Code I'm going to open up a new terminal. In that server open, I just want to double check that my virtual environment is activated. So I'm going to do source BMV bin activate again. And now I can create my mQTT site by doing MPX docs new dot.
[05:22] So we can see up here that's created a couple of different files for us. So in this mQTT Yaml file I'm just going to add in the basic configuration for the material theme. So I've basically just added in the site name a URL and the same name of material. And make sure I save that file. Then the terminal we can do MK docs serve.
[05:42] We can see at the bottom that our site is running on localhost port 8000. So let's open up a browser there. Now. And as simple as that we have a basic MTA docs material, website setup. So to get the most out of material for MK docs, it does require us to often make a lot of changes to this MK docs dot Yaml file.
[06:01] When you're making changes to Yaml files, it can be easy to make mistakes or errors, and it can be hard to spot them. But luckily, material for MK docs does have its own schema that we can install. And then with that sneak email, we can then clearly see if there's any errors in our Yaml file. So let's go ahead and get that set up now.
[06:18] So in order to do that I need to install make sure I have the Yaml extension installed. So I'm going to go over to the extensions tab and search for Yaml. And then this one here from Red hat. I'm just going to go ahead and install that. once I've installed that, if I just go down to the settings down here.
[06:35] Click on settings to open up the Visual Studio Code settings and go to changes to the code for the Json version of the settings. And then here after line seven, I'm going to paste in the code I need here for MK docs material schema validation. So again, you can get this from the documentation or from my accompanying blog post, which I'll leave a link to down in the in the description down below.
[07:02] So just go ahead and save the settings. And now if I go back over to the Yaml file, if I mouse over any of the key names here, like the site name, we can see that we get some more information displayed. So we get more information now displayed for all of the keys. And again we'll see an error if we type something in the MK docs.
[07:19] Yaml isn't expecting. So let's now make some changes to the style of our documentation, starting with changing the color scheme. So I want to change the color scheme to black. So here in the MK docs Yaml, can I add a new line. I'm going to say palette. And then for the scheme I want to change that to slate.
[07:37] Let's save that. If I take a look in the browser. Now, the color scheme is now changed to the dark color scheme. Just because we are going to be making quite a few configuration changes and then just doing a live reload. I'm just going to put the code, the Visual Studio code alongside the browser so that we can see it a bit easier.
[07:51] Okay. That's also changed the primary color scheme. To do that I enter primary. I'm just going to choose green. Save that. Now we can see the primary color scheme is changed to green at the top. You can see the links here. And now change to be in green as well. So also change the accent color. And I'm going to change that to Deep purple.
[08:11] Save that again. So now when whenever we highlight a highlight a link we can see that it's changed to Deep Purple. So another cool thing that we can do is that we can actually add a toggle within our material site, so that we can actually click on an icon that will change between light and dark mode. So let's see how to do that. Now.
[08:27] So I'm going to delete what I currently have in the palette here. And I'm going to paste in this new code which has a scheme for the dark mode and the light mode. So the dark mode here, this is for the slate theme. We're setting the icon. We're going to see that icon in just a second. We've set our primary in accent color.
[08:44] And then we've done a similar thing here for the light mode as well. So if I just save that and if we look at our documentation now we've got this icon appears up here. Click on that. We can now toggle between light and dark mode easily. Like so. And there are lots of other options available to you. Material if you want to play with the color scheme.
[09:03] For example, if you want to add in your own custom colors, or if you want to add in configuration where it will automatically change between light and dark based on the time of day. But to do that, do check out the material documentation where this is explained. So let's now see how we can change the font in our material site.
[09:20] And material actually supports all of the fonts from Google Fonts directly out of the box. So let's see how we can add those in. Now. So back here in Visual Studio Code I'm going to close down the explorer here just to give me a bit more room. I'm actually going to make the terminal a little bit smaller as well.
[09:35] So to change the font underneath the name I'm going to type in font. And then for the text and I'm going to choose the fonts Merryweather Sans. So let me save that. And if you look at the documentation on the right, you can see that our font has changed to Merryweather Sans. We can also change the font for the code parts as well.
[09:54] So to do that we just type code. And let's choose Red Hat Mono for our code. So again I'll save that. And again you can see the font has changed there for the code as well. Now if you want to add additional fonts that aren't available in Google Fonts, or you want to make other font configuration changes, again, I would encourage you to check out the material documentation where this is explained.
[10:15] Before we go on, if you're finding this video helpful, please hit the like button down below and subscribe to the channel for more videos. Just like this. if you're looking for more guides and tutorials like this about material for MK docs and technical documentation in general, then do check out my website.
[10:32] Again, I'll leave a link in the description down below. Okay, let's carry on setting up our MK docs material site. Now, another cool thing about material is that you can actually use over 10,000 emojis and icons directly out of the box, with hardly any configuration. So I'm just here on the material documentation site, and we can just see here we could search for any icon here.
[10:54] And then we can get all sorts of emojis and see, you know, all sorts of different things that we could choose here to add to our documentation. So let's have a look now at how we can actually get that set up. so. I'm here in my MK docs dot Yaml file. And I'm just going to go down to the bottom below. I'm just going to paste in this extra bit of configuration.
[11:12] So again I'm adding these markdown extensions with these two options here. And that's going to enable us to use all of the different emojis. So I'm just going to save that. For now open up my index.html file which is our documentation file. I scroll down to the bottom. I'm just going to add in a new sentence.
[11:28] So I'll say I like to drink. Beers after I played soccer or football, as we call it in England. save that. We can see now that we get our emojis displayed in our documentation, like so. So now we've got emojis, and I can set up. Let's see how we can use one of those emojis and icons as the logo for our site.
[11:49] So I'm back here on the material documentation. If I just search for, let's say solid w, we can see we get this nice W symbol here. So this is the logo that I want to use for my site. My name will it. So the W kind of makes sense to use here. So jump back to Visual Studio Code in the MK docs Yaml file. I'm going to go up to the top.
[12:08] just underneath the font I want to change the icon. we want to change the logo. And then the one that we chose here was font awesome. slash solid forward slash w. So I just go ahead and save that. And if I now open my documentation in full screen, we can see that our logo has changed to this W up here. Now if you don't want to set the logo to an icon, but you wanted to set it to an actual image instead, you can easily do that.
[12:31] So let's see how to do that. Now. So in the docs folder I'm going to create a new folder called assets. And in the assets folder I'm just going to drop in the logo that I created previously. So just this simple little w. I go back over to the MK docs Yaml configuration. I'm going to take out the word icon here.
[12:48] I'm going to move the logo back to the start. And then we're going to point our logo to the assets logo dot PNG that we just specified. I'll save that here. If I jump over to the documentation now the logos change to the image that we just specified. if we look up here, we can see the five icon is still set to the default MK Doc's five icon.
[13:07] So let's see how we can also change that. So again I'm just going to add in a five icon into my assets folder. So again this is a five icon that I created previously. To change it what I need to do is say five icon. And then we'll point that to the assets five icon Iko that we just created. Let's save that.
[13:25] You can see in the top right here that the five icons now been updated. So you can actually change all of the icons that are present in the material site by default. For example the back and forward arrows that appear. But to do that, do check out the material documentation where this is explained. And one of the best features of material for MK dogs is the ability to display code in a clear and concise manner.
[13:47] So let's have a look at how we can set up these code blocks. Now. So let's create a new page in our documentation for these code blocks. So in the docs folder I'm going to create a new file. I'll call it code examples dot empty. Then I'm just going to paste in some really simple Python code. So here between the three backticks, I just added in a really simple bit of Python code that's adding up two numbers.
[14:11] So let me save that. If I go over to my documentation site code examples and we can see here now that we've got this code block. But obviously it doesn't look that nice. It's not colored properly. There's no highlighting or anything like that. So let's see how we can get that set up within MK docs so that it looks a bit better.
[14:28] So to do that we just jump over to the MK docs Yaml file. Again I'm going to scroll down to the bottom here just underneath markdown extensions. I'm going to paste in this bit of configuration here. And again remember you can copy all of this from the documentation. I now save that. If I go back to my code example start MD.
[14:45] And after the three ticks here, if I specify that I want this to be Python code by adding py, save that. And then now after we save that, we can see in our documentation. This has been nicely highlighted for us. Now obviously I just typed in py here because I wanted Python code and this is what's called a pigment.
[15:02] So you can find all of the different pigments listed on this page. Again I'll link to this in the documentation. There's a pigment for pretty much every language you would want JavaScript, C-sharp, Yaml, etc. so you can just find them from this page. So another thing that we might want to do to our code block is add in a title.
[15:19] So to do that we can just add in the title keyword. And then let's just call this file add numbers. If I save that we can see that our code box now got this nice title. We can also show the line numbers as well. So let's do that. We just put in line numbers. And then we're going to want to start it from one here.
[15:35] So that just shows all of the nine numbers starting from one. We could also start it from a different number if we wanted. So I would just change that to five for example. But for here I'm just going to keep it as one. We can also highlight lines as well. So to show you how to do that let me add in another bit of code.
[15:49] So this time I've added in another code block. But this time it's for JavaScript. But here, as well as naming the file and giving the line numbers. I've also said that I want to highlight lines 2 to 4, like so. Let me save that. So now here we can see in this code block. In this it's displayed as JavaScript.
[16:08] And lines 2 to 4 are highlighted. Another cool thing we can do in material is add content tabs. So these are really useful. For example, if you've got three different code examples in different languages, people can then click on individual tabs to see the text or the code behind those. So let's have a look at how to do that.
[16:25] Now. back again in the MK docs dot Yaml plots at the bottom. I'm just going to paste in another bit of configuration. So I've added in this bit here for the preview I am done. It stabs and the alternate sized alternate style. True. I'll save that. my docs folder. I'm actually going to create a new file that's called a Swann Content Types dot empty.
[16:45] in here let's see how we can add some very simple text. That's not code. So over here this is just adding in three different content tabs. It's just going to show some plain text. It's going to show an unordered list and an ordered list. I'll save that then. If I go over to the content types page we can see down here we've got the plain text, the unordered text, and the ordered unordered list.
[17:06] So we can just cycle between those three like so. Head back over to Visual Studio Code. Let's have a look at how this would look with code instead. So I'll paste in some more code here. So this is doing now with code blocks. So we want two code blocks here. One for Python and one for JavaScript. You know just save that.
[17:24] We can see that our code blocks now appear here like so. So now we can cycle between these two different code blocks, which is really cool and useful. Let's next look at how we can add admonitions to our MK docs material. Admonitions are kind of like call outs, i.e. they're kind of a way of just highlighting certain text in the documentation.
[17:43] So let's have a look at how to add those. Now. To new MK docs Yaml file and go down to the bottom here. I'm just going to add in these two entries here for admonition and PIM down x dot details. Go ahead and save that. And create another new page for these admonitions. So in the docs folder we'll create a new file called it admonitions. MD.
[18:05] And then I'm just going to paste in a simple admonition to this one's a note. And it has this title here. So let me save this file. I go over to my documentation, click on admonitions. And the admonition just appeared here. So it's got the title and then it's got the text that appears under it like so. could also add in a collapsible one to let me show you what that looks like.
[18:26] That one's almost the same, except it has three question marks instead of three exclamation marks. I save that one, And then we get this collapsible admonition. So we can click on it here like so. And we can see that the icon slightly different. And that's because we've chosen an info type instead of a note type.
[18:42] So if you head over to the MK docs documentation, you can see all of the different types of admonitions that you can choose. So we've got our note and info types that we chose. You can also have an abstract app success. Quite a few others here as well. So do have a look through the documentation to find one that suits you.
[18:58] Another cool thing we can add to our material site is diagrams. And these diagrams actually statically render in our documentation. So, for example, if you wanted to put in a flowchart or state diagram, you can just add in a few different instructions. And then the diagram will render directly in the documentation.
[19:15] So let's take a look at how we can do that now. So I'm just going to close down some of these windows and then just go over to my MK docs Yaml tab. So here under Super Fences I'm going to put a colon, I'm just going to paste in a bit of extra configuration. So I'm basically adding in this custom fences. And I'm saying the name of the class is mermaids.
[19:32] And then this format here like so again you can cram all of this code just from the documentation or from the blog post. If you don't want to type all of this out. Hopefully you can see all of that. me just save that file. And let's create another new page. Let's call this one diagram examples dot and. And now let's look at a couple of diagram examples.
[19:53] So here I've just put in a very simple flowchart. So I'm just going to save this new  diagram examples page and then open that up in my documentation. And you see for a second there you saw the code for full mermaid for for this flowchart. And then it converted into this actual flowchart. So this actual flowchart is being rendered directly from this code being directly rendered in our documentation.
[20:17] So that's a flowchart. Let's also try a sequence diagram. So again I'm just going to paste in this code here for the sequence diagram. If I save that again our page our documentation now renders out this really nice looking sequence diagram for us. So again there's lots of different diagrams that you can render in your documentation.
[20:36] We have here like flowchart sequence diagrams that we've seen. You consider state diagrams class diagrams etc.. So again do check out the material documentation if you want to learn more about how this works and some of the other options that are available to you. So now we've got quite a few different pages in our documentation site.
[20:53] What would be really cool is if we could add footer that would appear on all of those pages. So let's take a look at how to do that. Now. So first we need to make a small configuration change in our MK docs Yaml file. So here just under the five icon I'm going to choose features. And the feature that I want is navigation dot footer.
[21:11] Go ahead and save that. the full screen version of my documentation and we see that we've now got this footer added that says made with two of MK docs and any page that I click on now will have that footer. A common thing to add into your footer is links to your other social media accounts. So let's see how we can do that now.
[21:28] So again I'm going to go down to the bottom of the MK docs Yaml. I'm just going to paste in these two blocks here. So this is just a call out to my YouTube channel and call out to my LinkedIn profile here as well. So obviously you can replace these with your own social media accounts. So again I'll just save that.
[21:48] Head over to the documentation again. And now that we get these two little icons appear and they link to my YouTube account and to my LinkedIn as well. And again, these obviously appear on all of the different pages. One final thing we might want to add is the copyright message. So again to do that you can just add simply the copyright key.
[22:06] And then type in your copyright message like so. Save that. Once more if we look at that and we can now see that we get this nice copyright message appears  in our documentation. Okay. So we've built a nice little documentation site on our local machine. But now we want to publish it on the internet. So to do that we're going to use what's called GitHub actions.
[22:25] And this is basically GitHub automated Cicd solution. We're going to use that to publish our documentation on the internet onto a GitHub page. So let's see how we can do that. Now. So to publish to GitHub I need to specify the actions. So to do that I'm going to add a new folder and I'll call it GitHub. And that GitHub fault in that GitHub folder I'll add another folder called workflows.
[22:49] In that workflows we add a new file called ci dot yaml. I'm going to paste in the configuration for this GitHub action. So all that this is basically doing is just saying when there's a push to the master or the main branch, GitHub action is just going to do all of the work to install MK docs material and then publish our CI onto a GitHub page.
[23:10] So again, this should just work out of the box. You shouldn't need to change anything in this configuration unless you're running like behind a firewall or something. There might be some problems, but this should just work out of the box. So I'm just going to make sure that I save this file. So now to publish to a GitHub page I'm first need to push to a new GitHub repository.
[23:28] So I'm going to create I've looked into GitHub and I'm going to create a new repository. I'm just going to call it MK docs material. tutorial let's say 2024. I'll leave it as a public repo. I'll leave all the settings as the same. And I'm going to hit Create Repository. So I'm using ssh. I'm just going to grab this bottom command here to add the get remote.
[23:48] I head back over to Visual Studio Code I'm going to make the terminal at the bottom a little bit bigger. I'm going to hit control C to shut down my locally running MK docs site. I now need to initialize a git repository here. So I just do get init. Before I make my commit I do actually want to add a ignore file.
[24:06] I'll just write in a new file to the root. I'll call that docker ignore. And it might get ignored. So I'm just going to add everything that I want to exclude. So again you can skip this step if you want. But it just can be useful. Otherwise you might just push too many files to GitHub that you didn't want to.
[24:20] So again you can grab this get ignore file from my repository that I'll link to in the description down below. Okay, I can close that down now. I'll close that get ignore file. Now in the terminal I can do git add dot to add all of the files for commits. I'll just do a get status just to check what's getting committed.
[24:38] that looks good. These are all of the files that we're going to commit. So now I'll make the commit say git commit dash m for the message. Let's call this one initial commit. Now I want to add that remote branch. So again I'm just going to copy this command here. Paste that get remote add there like so. Now I should be able to push to that remote repository.
[25:00] So just to get push. Remote main. Oh, sorry. That's a typo. It should be git push origin. Main. Okay, so git push origin main. If I go back over to GitHub. Now if I refresh the page on this repository we should see all of our code has been pushed up here now. Like so. So now in order to publish our MK docs material site to GitHub pages, we just need to click on settings here.
[25:23] Go down to pages. Make sure you choose deploy from a branch as the source. Then for the branch choose GitHub pages. Click save and then once you do that, if you click on actions here, you can see that a new job has been triggered for this pages. Build and deployment. And the GitHub action is going to do all of the work of deploying our CI on the internet for us on a GitHub page.
[25:45] So after a few seconds the deployment should finish. And we get this URL here. So if I click on this link now we can see that our website has been deployed on the internet. So we can see it's been deployed at this address here. Like so. In this video, we've seen how to create and deploy an entire material for MK docs documentation website completely from scratch.
[26:05] We've been taking a look at just a few of the awesome features that material for MK docs ships with. Now we've only really scratched the surface of what material offers in this video. So to learn more about the many other features that are on offer, do check out the official documentation. But what about you? Are you using material for MK docs? What other features would you like to see covered? Let me know in the comments down below.
[26:29] I'd love to hear from you. But that's all for this video. I'll see you in the next one.
